---

title: Legality and Immorality
date: '2012-03-06'
categories: rants
tags: [religion, law]
permalink: post/18850979784/legality-and-immorality

---

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches the general
principle that its members should be “[subject to kings, presidents,
rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the
law](http://www.lds.org/library/display/0,4945,106-1-2-1,FF.html)”. The
interpretation of of this principle is left up to the members. It seems
to equate legality to morality. If you break the law, then you are
sinning by disobeying this commandment. There are many scriptural
examples of this principle. Jesus
[said](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/nt/luke/20.25?lang=eng#24),
“Render therefore unto Cæsar the things which be Cæsar’s[.]” In ancient
Israel, the law of God *was* the legal law. There are also
counterexamples. Daniel gets [cast into the lions’
den](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/ot/dan/6.7-11?lang=eng#6) for
disobeying the law against prayer. [Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego](https://www.lds.org/scriptures/ot/dan/3.12-26?lang=eng#11)
disobey King Nebuchadnezzar’s commands and are preserved by God when
they are punished. Paul is
[arrested](http://www.lds.org/scriptures/nt/acts/21) for preaching the
Gospel. In some circumstances, morality and legality are at odds. The
law moves slowly, and is imperfect. Copyright and intellectual property
laws are especially flawed in an age where digital media can be copied
with zero cost. Copyright violation might be illegal, but that does not
necessarily make it immoral.
