---

title: The Cuckoo's Egg Is About Being Relentlessly Curious
date: '2012-03-01'
categories: rants
tags: [books, curiosity, learning]
permalink: post/18555008259/the-cuckoos-egg-is-about-being-relentlessly-curious

---

The publisher’s blurb for **The Cuckoo’s Egg** says it is about “[how
one ingenious American trapped a spy ring paid in cash and
cocaine](http://www.amazon.com/Cuckoos-Egg-Tracking-Computer-Espionage/dp/0743411463)”.
It is **actually** about the cost and benefit of being relentlessly
curious.

Clifford Stoll spent months tracking a hacker across the globe. He
undertook the delicate, secretive dance of watching the hacker. Driven
by a relentless curiosity to discover the identity of the intruder, he
came up with several ingenious solutions to technical problems and
combating the combined apathy of his co-workers, his boss, and the
United States government.

Because he was curious enough to notice little inconsistencies in his
computer network, he found a hacker. Because he was curious enough to
track the hacker’s movements, he discovered his methods and location.
Clifford’s relentless curiosity led him to accidentally become one of
the country’s foremost expert on computer security. It was a wonderful
accomplishment, and it was all driven by his drive to **know**. He
started with a question and worried at it until it unraveled into a
story that transformed his life.

Like all great accomplishments, it came with a cost. It took a toll on
his relationships. Several times he dashed off in the middle of the
night or interrupted dates with his girlfriend to get to the lab and
watch printouts of the hacker’s activities. Because of his curiosity, he
accomplished great things. Because of his curiosity, he suffered
personally.
